# Data Modeling for Song Play Analysis with Postgres

The Project of Data Engineering Nanodegree Program on the Udacity

# Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

I create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis.

# How to Run the Python scripts

Enter the following command in the terminal：
1. 'python create_tables.py'
2. 'python etl.py'

# Project Datasets

## Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

*song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json*

*song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json*

## Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.
The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

*log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json*

*log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json*

# Project Instructions
## Schema for Song Play Analysis
### Fact Table
1.songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
### Dimension Tables
1. users - users in the app
  - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
2. songs - songs in music database
  - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
3. artists - artists in music database
  - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
4. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
  - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Project Template
1. **create_tables.py** drops and creates the tables. We run this file to reset the tables before each time we run the ETL scripts.
2. **etl.ipynb** reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into the tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
3. **etl.py** reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into the tables. We can fill this out based on we work in the ETL notebook.
4. **README.md** provides discussion on the project.
5. **sql_queries.py** contains all the sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.
6. **test.ipynb** displays the first few rows of each table to let's check the database.